= Model of crypt formation on 2D intestinal organoids with 4 different cell types =

Before looking at this, you may wish to look at some of the [wiki:UserTutorials basic user tutorials] for Chaste.

== Getting the code and installing dependencies ==

Before running this model you will need to [wiki:InstallGuides/InstallGuide install Chaste's dependencies] and the [http://www.cs.ox.ac.uk/chaste/download.html source code for lates version].
The easiest way to do this is using an Ubuntu machine (or an Ubuntu virtual machine) as discussed on [wiki:InstallGuides/UbuntuPackage]. 
Note that Chaste is only fully supported on !Linux/Unix systems, so users of Windows or Mac OS X may need to follow the virtual machine route.
For manual installation of each dependency, on any version of Linux, see DeveloperInstallGuide.

You will also need the source for the CryptFission4CellTypes project.  This can be done by checking out the version from the repository by using the command 
{{{
git clone https://github.com/slmontes/SimpleCryptCount_Project.git CryptFission4CellTypes
}}}
and add it to the projects folder of the Chaste directory.

Now the project should be installed, and everything should compile and run correctly. 
You can now run the tests or simulations, or create your own test suites.

== Documentation ==
There are two folders - `src` and `test`.
 1. The `src` folder contains the classes necesary to run the simulation. These define the aditional forces and boundary conditions not in the core chaste code.
 1. The `test` folder contains:
  * [Chaste_source/projects/CryptFission4CellTypes/TestCryptFission4CellTypes_EC10toTA70.hpp] - this file can be run to generate the in-silico results
  
== Running tests ==
You can then run tests and simulations with,
{{{
cd <Chaste_build path>
make -j4 TestCryptFission4CellTypes_EC10toTA70
ctest -j4 -V -R TestCryptFission4CellTypes_EC10toTA70
}}}
----
'''NB''': the paper was developed with release version 2021, but will work on release version 2019 and 2018.1. It will not work with with release version 3.4 or under.

For further information on using Chaste, see the [wiki:ChasteGuides extensive guide material].
You may also wish to look at some of the [wiki:UserTutorials basic user tutorials].
